K—12 Arts Education
Curriculum Consultation Report

2009 (DRAFT)

Government of Alberta
Education

ALBERTA EDUCATION CATALOGUING IN PUBLICATION DATA

 

Copyiight @2009, the Crown in Right ofAlberta, as represented by the Minister of Education. Albeita Education,
Cuniculum Branch, 44 Capital Boulevard, 10044 7 108 Street NW, Edmonton, Albeita, Canada, T5] 5E6.

Every effott has been made to provide proper acknowledgement of Oiiginal sources. If cases are identiﬁed where this
has not been done, please notify Albeita Education s0 appropriate corrective action can be taken.

Permission is given by the copyiight owner to reproduce this document for educational purposes and on a nonproﬁt
basis, with the exception of mateiials cited for which Alberta Education does not own copyiight

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report

 

Background .................................................................................................................................... 1
Demographics ................................................................................................................................ 2
Current Status of Fine Arts Programs in Schools .......................................................................... 3
What’s Working and Success Stories ..................................................................................... 3
Challenges .............................................................................................................................. 5
Hopes for a New Curriculum ................................................................................................. 7

A New Program with a New Name ............................................................................................... 9
Education Is 21 Thumbs Up ..................................................................................................... 9
Those in Favour ..................................................................................................................... 9
Those Opposed ..................................................................................................................... 10
Alternative Names ............................................................................................................... 10

The Arts and 21St Century Learning .............................................................................................. 11
Theme: Globalization ............................................................................................................ 11
Theme: Information and Technology ................................................................................... 11
Theme: The Complex Learner .............................................................................................. 12
Dreams and Visions for the Future of Arts Education .................................................................. 13
Identifying Key Concepts and Structural Models ................................................................ 13
Model A: ....................................................................................................................... 14

Model B : ....................................................................................................................... 15

Model C: ....................................................................................................................... 16

Model D: ....................................................................................................................... 17

Model E: ........................................................................................................................ 18

Model F : ........................................................................................................................ 19

Model G: ....................................................................................................................... 20

Model H: ....................................................................................................................... 2 1

Model I: ......................................................................................................................... 22

Model J : ........................................................................................................................ 23

Model K: ....................................................................................................................... 24

Model L: ........................................................................................................................ 25

Model M: ...................................................................................................................... 26

Model N: ....................................................................................................................... 27

Model 0: ....................................................................................................................... 28
Recommendations ........................................................................................................................ 29
Recommendation for Core Learnings ................................................................................... 29
Recommendation for Teacher Development and Certification ............................................ 29
Recommendation for Curriculum Acquisition Feasibility .................................................... 29
Recommendation for Middle Years — Complementary Programs Collaboration ................. 30
Recommendation for Next Steps ......................................................................................... 30
K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report i

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

 

ii K—12 Aits Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©A1berta Education, Alberta, Canada

Background

Existing fine arts programs require revision to represent current research, promising practice,
cultural diversity and technological infusion in response to Alberta’s needs. Alberta Education
has initiated a project plan for the reView and revision of ﬁne arts programs in Alberta.
Curriculum Branch and French Language Services Branch have seconded Arts Education
Program Managers to codevelop these programs.

As part of the curriculum reView process, a number of strategies were used to determine the
Vision for a new Arts Education curriculum in Alberta. Focus groups represent one strategy for
curriculum reView. Throughout 2008, focused discussions with diverse stakeholders informed
the development of a Draft K712 Arts Education Curriculum F ramework. Stakeholder groups
included teachers, administrators, artists and community leaders in the arts, including
representation from Francophone, French Immersion, and First Nations, Metis and Inuit (FNMI)
communities.

Four goals guided the initial focus group discussion in Arts Education.

The first goal was to collect information regarding the current status of fine arts programs
in schools. There was a need to learn about the success stories in fine arts in schools and what
was working well with the programs. There was also a need to learn about the challenges of
providing quality fine arts programs in schools and to ask for stakeholder hopes for a new
curriculum in Arts Education.

The second goal was to ask focus group participants to consider a change in program
terminology. The current programs of study are named F me Arts Programs. New research and
pedagogy uses the term Arts Education to broaden the concept of the fine arts to include learning
in, through, and about the arts. If Alberta is going to change the name of its programs of study
and the philosophical shift that goes along with a name change, Ministry staff needed to ask
stakeholders to consider the implications of a change in program name.

The third goal required the focus group to consider why the arts are important in the

21St century and the role of Arts Education in 21St century learning. There have been many
changes in our world since the current curriculum was designed. In order to create a curriculum
that is relevant and serves the needs of Alberta’s students into the future, Ministry staff needed to
define the rationale and relevance of a new Arts Education program.

The final and most important goal assigned to the focus groups was to envision the key
components of an Arts Education program. As individuals, group participants were asked to
use arts processes to communicate the kinds of experiences they would like Alberta’s students to
have in the arts. Then they came together to determine the similarities and differences among
the Visions to determine key concepts. Groups were asked to use a graphic organizer to represent
their key concepts for Arts Education programming and the relationship among these elements.
Ministry staff’s hope was to find commonalities and some consensus among the focus groups’
Visions in order to inform development of a Draft K712 Arts Education Curriculum Framework.

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 1
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Demographics

In January 2008, six K—12 Arts Education focus groups were established to consult with teachers
of the arts, district consultants and practicing artists, as well as representatives from arts
organizations and post-secondary programs. Two groups were held in Calgary, one group in
Lethbridge, and three groups in Edmonton. In total, 63 participants engaged in the discussions.

School authority superintendents were invited to nominate four teachers from each district.
Thirty-one school authorities from across the province responded to the call for nominations. At
least one staff member from each school authority was selected. In order to ensure diversity in
perspective, the teacher selection process considered the following factors: variety in grade
1eve1(s) and fine arts disciplines taught, generalist/specialist training, and teaching experience.
The teacher sample included representatives from two Francophone school authorities and
several French Immersion schools. Also included in this group of ﬁne arts teachers were two
school administrators, one from an arts-focused school in a city centre and another from 3 K—12
school in rural Alberta. School-based involvement totalled 38 participants.

The Program Development and Standards Division both facilitated and participated in the
discussion on behalf of the Ministry of Education. Curriculum Branch and French Language
Services Branch each had two representatives leading/involved in the discussions, for a total of
four Ministry representatives. Cross-ministry collaboration included a representative from the
Arts Branch, Ministry of Culture and Community Spirit. Government involvement totalled five
participants.

Mount Royal College, the University of Alberta, the University of Lethbridge and Grant
MacEwan College were represented. Post-secondary involvement totalled four participants.

Fine arts consultants at the school authority level represented Edmonton Public Schools,
Edmonton Catholic Schools, Calgary Board of Education, Calgary Separate School District and
Foothills School District. This selection process included school authorities with specialized arts
consultants and general curriculum consultants with a background in teaching the arts. Arts
consultant involvement totalled eight participants.

Practicing artists and those involved in arts organizations were included in the discussions.
Many of these artists wore two hats, often representing the perspective of an arts organization as
well. Artists and arts organization involvement totalled eight participants.

 

2 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©A1berta Education, Alberta, Canada

Current Status of Fine Arts Programs in Schools

What’s Working and Success Stories

Passion and Enthusiasm

In response to the question, “What’s working in fine arts in schools today?” focus group
participants were quick to respond. Student enthusiasm for the fine arts was identiﬁed strongly.
Program success was attributed almost completely to teacher passion, commitment and expertise.
Many identified that the teacher is the program. Teacher participants identiﬁed that successful
school programs were also the result of supportive school administrators and central office staff.

Career Options and Employable Skills

Focus groups felt that the public is realizing that career opportunities are growing in the fine arts.
In fact, business analysts are saying that fine arts graduates are valuable human resources. As a
result, many students want to continue their study of the arts at the post-secondary level.

There was pride in the fact that our school system is developing future teachers of the arts and
working/practicing artists. Even if students do not choose to continue with the arts in their post-
secondary choices and career plans, participation in the arts develops employability skills such as
improvisation, commitment, organization and problem solving. Participation in the arts develops
interests and talents that will improve students’ quality of life on whatever paths they choose.

Arts for the Whole Child and Every Child

The groups felt a strong camaraderie around the arts and fine arts programs in schools. Although
they were tired of having to “justify their existence,” they recognized the need to champion the
arts as essential to nurturing, caring for and developing the whole child.

Group participants were encouraged that the arts still exist and that the arts are still taught as
discrete disciplines. There was great joy surrounding the idea that the arts were valued as an
important measure of student success. All students have talents and abilities, and our school
system honours many ways of knowing and being. The arts develop confidence in students and
also promote empathy and healing. Other discussion referred to students with special needs
achieving success in the arts.

High School Completion

The groups told many good—news stories about students who were able to stay in school and
achieve success as a result of their involvement in the arts. The arts addressed student interest
and accommodated learning differences and learning preferences. Many students need the arts to
be able to learn and demonstrate their learning at school. Many described arts programs as
therapeutic for students at risk. Arts teachers were successful at saving students from the cruelty
of individual circumstances through safe, accepting arts communities and the expression of
emotion. The arts were identified as critical in giving students a sense of belonging and voice.

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 3
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Creativity and Thinking Skills

Participants felt that there was growing recognition of the importance of ﬁne arts for cognitive
development, resulting in increased support for quality arts programs in Alberta’s schools. Arts
disciplines foster creativity, problem—solving skills and the expression of thoughts, feelings and
ideas. Participants identified that the need to imagine and create is Visceral. This need is
especially nurtured in the arts and must be encouraged in our school system through Arts
Education.

Inﬂuence of the Media

Also mentioned was the inﬂuence of the media in drawing attention to the importance of the arts
in our schools. Participants felt that television programs like So You Think You Can Dance and
American/Canadian [do] help to elevate the profile of the arts and inspire students to participate
in the arts.

The Arts are Programs of Choice

Arts-focused schools are becoming more common. There is an increase in demand for arts
programs, and the ﬁne arts are becoming a popular program of choice. In one large school
district, 68 schools are now arts-centred schools. Although Alberta does not have a provincial
dance program, school districts are seeing increasing interest and demand for locally developed
courses (LDCs) and extra—curricular programs in dance. Group participants were proud of the
experiences that students were having in the arts as a result of LDCs. Many teachers were
unaware of the LDCs that had been developed, and they expressed a desire to have easier access
to LDCs across school authorities.

Cultural Identity and Global Community

The celebration of cultural identity and the understanding of global community were key themes
in the discussions of what’s working. Students involved in the arts had a strong sense of identity
and belonging in their school communities, and the arts programs are often the hub of the school.
Many stories were told of how students from different cultures found common ground in the arts.

There was some frustration about English as a Second Language (ESL) students being “pulled
out” of their ﬁne arts options for English language instruction, when clearly, the language of the
arts was a successful form of communication for these students.

There was mention of the arts building support for schools within communities. Often, ﬁne arts
events bring to gether school staff, students, parents and community members in celebration.

Curriculum

Ironically, many participants stated that the ﬂaws in the curriculum worked to their advantage.
Many liked the ﬂexibility of having to “invent” or “make do” without arts curriculums because it
allowed for creativity, ﬂexibility and variety in programming. Teachers also appreciated that the
arts allowed for work in both process and product.

 

4 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Challenges

Curriculum

Group participants were frustrated with the lack of continuity between the elementary, junior
high and senior high levels. Because junior high ﬁne arts courses are optional and senior high
courses require no prerequisites, student knowledge and skill in Grade 10 ﬁne arts courses can
fall anywhere on a continuum from novice to advanced.

Arts Infusion/Integration

While most participants were excited about the opportunities to integrate and infuse the arts into
other subject areas, there was considerable concern that the integrity of individual arts disciplines
could be compromised if integration/infusion were to become a curriculum focus.

Participants were encouraged about the value placed on the arts when district results and A181
projects highlighted increased academic success as a result of arts integration. However, there
were concerns about losing the intrinsic value of the arts when schools focus on “using” the arts
for academic gains.

Professional Development

Professional development was also identified as both a success and a challenge. Arts specialists
are very interested in keeping their craft up-to-date and their skills sharp. However, in many
school districts, arts educators often felt isolated, excluded from professional learning
communities and “on their own.” Elementary generalists stated that they lacked confidence in
teaching the arts and needed support. The Internet was identified as an excellent resource for
teachers to share lessons and get information to ﬁll their skill gaps. The Internet also helps
teachers cope with a lack of resources.

Focus group participants had mixed emotions regarding artist—in—residence programs. While
many artists in residence were well trained and ﬁt into classrooms seamlessly, some teachers had
experiences with artists who they felt were not qualified to be in the classroom.

Space and Facilities

Space and facilities were consistently identified as challenges to providing quality Arts
Education programs for Alberta’s students. Focus group participants hoped for a commitment to
the arts in schools that includes adequate facilities.

Participants felt that school administrators are struggling to ﬁnd teaching spaces to meet Class
Size Initiative (CSI) targets. As a result, music, drama and art classrooms are often the first to be
compromised.

Proper facilities for the arts present challenges as well. Big-ticket items such as instruments,
mirrors and proper ventilation were not covered by the school system. Fundraising or “going
without” has become common practice. Storage space is at a premium in schools, and the arts
require large and often expensive items that need proper storage facilities. Without proper space
and equipment, the quality of student experience in the arts diminishes.

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 5
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Time

Elementary teachers had much concern about fitting “everything” into an elementary program.
Even though music and art are core programs at the K—6 level, the arts are often seen as a “frill”
and fall by the wayside in a teacher’s best effort to meet all curriculum outcomes.

At the junior high level, there was no consistency in the amount of time allocated for ﬁne arts
courses. Many teachers were unaware of the 7 5-hour recommendation for instructional time for
ﬁne arts courses, as mentioned in the programs of study.

Senior high school graduation requirements pose a challenge for the arts. Student timetables are
very full, and many students who want to participate in the arts simply cannot “ﬁt it in” or are
forced to make course selections where the arts are in competition with academics and/or other
options.

Administration is Key

The relationship between the ﬁne arts teacher and the school administrator was identified as both
a challenge and a gift. On one hand, many participants felt that the arts were “used” by school
administrators as wallpaper and entertainment when there was a special occasion or a public
relations opportunity—that value was not placed on arts processes and the intrinsic benefit of the
arts. On the contrary, some administrators understood the needs of ﬁne arts programs and
prioritized time for the ﬁne arts in the school’s timetable or accommodated creative scheduling
to allow students to participate in ﬁne arts courses.

Staffing
There was group consensus that passionate, talented, knowledgeable educators in the ﬁne arts are

the cornerstone of successful programs. It is a constant challenge to recruit and retain quality
staff.

While it was clear from the groups that arts specialists were preferred, there was recognition that
it was difficult to staff arts specialists, especially in rural areas.

Teacher exhaustion in the arts is common. When the focus of ﬁne arts programs is showcase and
production, art educators often have demanding extra-curricular schedules. In addition, arts
teachers often end up teaching “what’s left over” on the timetable: subjects that are not in their
area of expertise or passion. Consequently, many arts educators leave the teaching profession
feeling unappreciated and “burned out.”

There was also concern that passionate arts educators who are deeply involved in their
disciplines do not pursue school administration or positions where they are able to have some
inﬂuence on arts programming. Hence, many leaders making decisions about the arts have a
limited understanding of the importance of the arts or what is required to achieve successful
programming.

 

6 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Hopes for a New Curriculum

Many focus group participants were encouraged that the arts curriculum was finally being
addressed by Alberta Education and excited that “help is on the way.” All participants were
extremely excited and grateful to be included in the curriculum reView process and expressed a
desire to stay in touch with new developments.

Integrity of Discipline

There was a strong consensus for maintaining the integrity of individual ﬁne art disciplines. The
groups wanted to ensure that each discipline’s language, history, tools, skills and processes were
honoured. The terrnArts Education conjured fears of a single program of studies for the arts.
There was a clear message from the groups that they did not want to see a new curriculum erode
the rigor of individual disciplines.

Dance Program

All focus groups were strong advocates for a provincial dance program. While dance is included
in the physical education program, the focus is on physical activity and not on creative
expression. There was some discussion about the need to expand the range of disciplines in the
arts to include emerging and interdisciplinary arts opportunities.

Curriculum

The groups expressed hopes that Alberta Education would create K—l2 programs with unity
between ﬁne arts disciplines and levels. There was a desire for the programs to share core goals
based on current research and promising practice. While there would be overarching goals for
all arts programs, teachers asked for clearly stated specific outcomes at each grade level.

Groups also hoped that Alberta Education would reduce the number of curriculum outcomes to
allow for student and teacher creativity and in—depth exploration of key concepts. The
elementary music curriculum was singled out as an example of a content—heavy curriculum; even
experienced teachers found it difﬁcult to achieve all elementary music outcomes. It was
suggested that the Arts Education curriculum allow time and space for student and teacher
creativity and ﬂexibility.

There was some openness among participants to explore interdisciplinary possibilities where
several arts disciplines could be combined.

Teachers would like to see instructional ideas embedded within a curriculum document. They
would also appreciate the integration of up-to-date technology that is specific to the arts.

Generalist Friendly

Participants acknowledged that programs of study often sit on the shelf because they use
language that is difficult for the generalist to understand. For example, art curriculum at the
elementary level is often taught by the classroom teacher, and it is one of the most diffith
programs of studies to understand. As a result, classroom teachers end up teaching “arts and
crafts” instead of Visual art. Both generalists and specialists expressed a desire for less technical,
more accessible user-friendly documents.

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 7
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Resources at the Ready

The lack of resources was consistently identified as a concern. Group participants were hopeful
about having up-to-date, authorized and available resources in the arts. Many were hopeful that
the resources would be focused on key concepts that could be achieved through project work.
Teachers would like support materials, including digital and Visual examples of how to achieve
curriculum outcomes.

Online/digital material, blogs and share sites were another example of resource support needs.
Teachers would like the opportunity to share their project and lesson ideas with one another and
create a community of online support as the new curriculum is implemented.

Teachers were interested in a resource list of suppliers and contacts in the arts industry. Many
beginning teachers in the arts were unaware of how to develop contacts to purchase equipment
and supplies.

Arts as Core

Many participants hoped that the arts would continue to be “core curriculum” at the elementary
level and that there would be some consideration to extending mandatory ﬁne arts instruction
beyond Grade 6. There was a belief that all students should be exposed to the ﬁne arts as
participants and as spectators. Future curriculum should help students build skills as both
producers and appreciators of the arts.

Implementation Support

Participants expressed their hope that sufficient implementation support would arrive with a new
curriculum. Excitement over Arts Education professional learning communities, in—servicing
and mentorship dominated these discussions.

Participants believed that a revitalization of the arts would breathe new life into the arts and into
schools. Many saw an opportunity for the arts to be honoured as an important component in
students’ development. Participants felt that if the arts were recognized as important and
worthwhile, then funding for materials, professional development, facilities and equipment
would be considered as part of the reView process.

There were hopes that curriculum implementation would break down barriers and allow for more
sharing across the province; i.e., access to locally developed courses across the province.

Link to Assessment

The assessment landscape has changed in the past 20 years, and ﬁne arts teachers are struggling
to find assessment tools that represent current research and promising practices. Much of the
assessment in the arts has focused on student production or performance. There is a need to
provide assessment strategies and exemplars that honour the creative processes of the arts,
encourage risk-taking and promote adaptive/improvisational thinking.

Simultaneous Implementation of French Programs

Teachers from French Immersion and Francophone schools expressed a desire to have French
programs of study and resources developed and implemented simultaneously with English
programs.

 

8 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

A New Program with a New Name

While a few participants were ambivalent, most recognized that the naming of the new program
was important. Some thought that Alberta should “get on boar ” with the rest of the world and
use the new term Arts Education. Others felt that Alberta did not have to be consistent with
programs in other provinces or places in the world.

Education Is a Thumbs Up

There was consensus that including the term Education within a new name was positive.

V Arts Education implies that the knowledge, skills and attitudes of the arts can be learned and
accomplished by ALL students. In contrast, the term F me Arts might imply that it is
reserved for professionals or those few who are considered to have talent.

V Arts Education implies that there is room for student growth.

The only objection to using the terrnArts Education was that it might be associated with the
academic study of the arts, and as a result become less focused on participation in the arts.

Those in Favour

Those in favour of the term Arts Education felt that the term spoke to broad-based
opportunities for students to learn in the arts, through the arts and about the arts.

V Arts Education is about process and product, while ﬁne arts is associated with performance
and/or production only.

Arts Education is a more accessible, non-threatening term for educators, especially
generalists.

Arts Education is less elitist than ﬁne arts.

Arts Education implies a focus on creative, critical thinking and the use of the imagination.
Arts Education gives the arts credibility in the education system: it sounds more “core.”

Arts Education allows for more cross-curricular connections. Learning through the arts
would address students’ multiple intelligences, learning styles and preferences. This would
also allow students and teachers to explore bringing emotion, intuition and creative processes
into other subject areas.

V Arts Education could expand interdisciplinary possibilities to combine two or more art forms.

\

xxxx

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 9
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Those Opposed

Those opposing the term Arts Education expressed fears that the term is a misnomer for
what arts educators are trying to accomplish with students and would be misunderstood by
our stakeholders.

Arts Education is strongly associated with visual art.

Arts Education is associated with liberal arts and includes subjects/topics such as literature,
creative writing, history and sociology.

Education stakeholders have an understanding of the term ﬁne arts and it would be difficult
to communicate a change in terminology.

Arts Education is too broad a term, and therefore has no meaning.

Arts Education is an administrative tactic to diminish the arts, to reduce them into one course
or category, instead of allowing music, art, drama and dance to take the space that they
require.

Arts Education erodes or “waters down” individual disciplines. We must maintain the
integrity of each discipline and not have them disappear into one term

The term ﬁne arts honours specialized skill development.

Alternative Names
Alternative names for the program were also suggested.

These included:

F ine Arts Education

Visual and Performing Arts Education
THE AR TS

Creative Arts

The ARTS are FINE

Education in the Arts

Performing, Visual and Creative Arts
Creative Disciplines

Aesthetic Education.

There was consensus that whatever a new program is named, there was both a responsibility and
an opportunity to communicate the purpose and Vision of the arts in Alberta’s schools. A change
in program name, Vision and philosophy would require a communication strategy for educating
students, teachers, parents, administrators and the public. While many participants were
frustrated with constantly having to “justify their existence” as arts educators, the excitement of a
new curriculum renewed a camaraderie in “taking up the cause” of arts advocacy once again.

 

10 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

The Arts and 21St Century Learning

Focus groups were asked to identify key themes in 21St Century learning and the role of the arts

within 21St Century learning.

Theme: Globalization

 

Globalization

The Role of Arts Education

 

Alberta’s schools are
becoming more culturally
diverse. Classrooms require
cultural literacy and
opportunities for cultural
celebration.

Focus group participants told stories of students
celebrating cultural diversity through Visual art, dance,
drama and music. The arts are the tools of cultural
expression and can transcend the barriers of language.
Arts Education helps students understand their local and
global community. In schools with Vibrant arts programs,
teachers identified increased respect for differences in
culture, history and perspective.

 

A global community
requires evolution from a
competition—based society to
a cooperation—based society.

The arts bring people together locally and globally.

 

The world has many
problems — environmental,
financial and political.

Creative thinking and empathy are requirements for a
hopeful future.

 

The world is becoming
increasingly Violent. The
future is uncertain.

The arts allow students to be introspective and reﬂective.
The arts can be a way for students and society to explore
powerful ideas and emotions in a non-Violent manner.

 

Theme: Information and Technology

 

Information and
Technology

The Role of Arts Education

 

The speed and quantity of
information is increasing.

The arts develop critical and creative thinking that is
needed for students to thrive in changing contexts.
Students need to be able to look at massive amounts of
information and think critically to analyze what is relevant
and what is important.

 

It is a world of instant
gratiﬁcation.

The processes of the arts afford time for reﬂection.
Students experience delayed gratiﬁcation and pride in
their accomplishments that develop over time. Students
are able to lose themselves in their work for long periods
of time.

 

 

It is an increasingly Visual
and Virtual world.

 

The arts provide holistic balance to the Visual, Virtual
world through opportunities for tactile, kinesthetic
experiences. The arts also help students communicate in a
variety of media.

 

 

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

11

2009 (DRAFT)

Theme: The Complex Learner

 

The Complex Learner

The Role of Arts Education

 

Students have complex
emotional needs. There
seems to be consensus that
the education system is
asking “more” from our
students. Society has high
expectations and there is
more stress and pressure put
onto students.

The arts honour the emotional life that is at the core of our
beings. The arts fortify students and foster emotional
wellness. Society and schools are demanding more from
students, and as a result, students are experiencing
increased stress. The arts allow for exploration of self and
give students a voice for their most important feelings and
ideas. The arts can have a healing effect on all students,
from those who are experiencing regular emotional
“growing pains” to those who are in emotional crisis.

 

Social needs

The arts allow time for play and creativity. They require
social interaction and cooperation among students and
provide opportunities for leadership and collaboration.
The arts give students a strong sense of belonging and
build community in schools.

 

Individual student success

All students can achieve success in the arts. There are
opportunities for individual and group success. Many
teachers told stories of students with special needs who
thrive in the ﬁne arts environment. The ﬂexible nature of
assessment in the arts allows for continuous feedback and
encourages students to continuously improve artistic
processes and output.

 

Development of the whole
child

The arts develop the whole person: mind, body and spirit.
Group participants felt strongly that creativity is inherent
in human nature and we must create learning
environments in our school system that nurture student
creativity.

 

Learning styles and
preferences

The arts help students find learning that “ﬁts.” Research
on brain development, multiple intelligences, and
differentiated instruction all advocate for learning in,
through and about the arts. Assessment strategies have
evolved towards an increase in formative tasks in which
students demonstrate their learning in a variety of media.

 

 

Employable skills

 

The arts develop problem—solving skills, critical and
creative thinking. The arts also provide opportunities for
students to lead and help others.

 

 

12
2009 (DRAFT)

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

 

Dreams and Visions for the Future of Arts Education

Participants were asked to express their dreams and Visions for the arts by using artistic
processes. While the means for communicating ideas differed among the participants, there were
commonalities among their hopes for the future. Representations for the future of Arts
Education overwhelmingly demonstrated optimism, passion and joy. Students were usually
represented holistically (mind, body and spirit) with the arts nurturing the students in their
discovery of self. Most often, a student was in the centre of the representations, with the arts
presented as foundational or core to the student’s well-being. Another common theme was that
the student was surrounded by interconnections or pathways to other people, communities and
cultures. The building of relationships through the arts was a consistent theme.

Identifying Key Concepts and Structural Models

Based on discussions of the ideas that resonated most strongly in the dreams and Visions activity,
participants were asked to work in groups to identify the themes or key concepts essential to
building an Arts Education program. Groups were asked to be discerning about the key
components they selected and were asked to prioritize them so that only broad, trans-disciplinary
concepts remained. The ﬁnal task was for the groups to organize their key components into a
Visual structure. What follows are the groups’ representations of key concepts and structural
models.

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 13
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Model A:

 

 

Knowledge Participation Presentation
0 History 0 Process and skill based 0 Showcase
o Skill development 0 Involvement 0 Display
0 Communication 0 Progression 0 Share
0 Reflection 0 Experience
0 Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Self—discovery
A Voice of their own
Self—confidence

Clear communication

Creativity

 

 

14 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Model B:

  

ImaginativelCreative

   
   

Celebration

 

Communication

 

V

Expression

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 15
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Model C:

 

 

Separate curriculums under a Critical/creative thinking as a Places for curriculums to collide
“ﬁne arts" umbrella means to discovery

 

 

 

 

 

 

Arts integration while keeping
the integrity of the ﬁne arts
subjects

Building of skill set through
continuous focused learning

 

 

 

 

 

Multiple
perspectives

Cultural linking; honouring
Awareness of options for past, present and future
Skill and vocabulary daily living, cultural
development With each development and historical

discipline pride

 

Understanding content in a
myriad of ways — vehicles into
learning or representing
understanding

 

 

Options for expression and Ability to observe and
discovery inte rpret beauty

 

 

 

Common [ To understand the world around us ]

language

 

 

 

Having FUN!
Expressing JOY!

 

 

16 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

 

Model D:

 

The key components ofa K—12 Arts Education program would promote . . .

 

 

 

 
   
 
 
   

Creative Expression

 

through the process ofengagement in the fine arts through . . .

 

 

 

 

   

Questioning Inquiry

Problem Solving H RiskTaking ]

Would promote the

 

 

 

developmentally appropriate Would promote an appreciation
acquisition of skills and 4 ‘ and understanding ofa variety of
techniques art forms

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
     

Community/
Group Work

  
    
    

 

Participating to
Improve Quality
of Life

  

 
 
  
 
 

  
    
 

Diffe re nt Ways

 
   
   
   

 

   
    
 

 

 
   
  
  

. Programming at
Making Of Knowmg a Higher Level to
Connections Prepare Students
Between School Thoughtful for Careers
and World Integration into

 

  

Other Areas

    
 
    

Appreciation

 
    

Cultural
Expression/
Global Vision

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report

17
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

2009 (DRAFT)

Model E:

 

 

Learning ABOUT Learning THROUGH Learning IN
0 History 0 Experience as o Skill Development
0 Appreciation as a Participant 0 Experience as

consumer 0 Integration and Participant
Interconnectedness 0 Conceptual

0 Experience

0 Multiple Modalities
0 Modes of Learning

 

 

Understanding
0 Lineage (mentor to
student)

 

 

 

 

   
   
  
 

   
 

Skill
Development

Participation

Nourishment of
the SOUL

Understanding

\

  

  
  

Spirited and
Spiritual

’@

Engagement

 
 
   

 

Experiment

 

 

 

Exposure

 

 

 

18
2009 (DRAFT)

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Model F:

 

SeIf-awareness

 

 

 

 

Else Awareness

 

 

 

 

 

 

Trial and error (mistakes are okay!), direct
teaching, demonstrations, problem solving,
meditation, understanding context of family
and self history, understanding of self in
present context, weekly classroom meetings,
talking about emotions, consensus building,
basic values, how to live your life, how to
think, individuality, building life skills,
confidence in self—expression.

 

 

(Stories, communication skills, listening,
paraphrasing, reﬂecting, mirroring, accepting
differences, creating safe learning
environments, critique and interpretation,
harmony, roIe-play, celebrating differences,
cooperation, collaborative work, observation,
brainstorming, knowledge of others, how to

krelate, building rapport, ﬁnding meaning.

\

/

 

/

Language of hope, finding belonging,
performance, group work, improvisation,

and expression, acceptance, sense of
community, finding a voice, honouring

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community
Mastery
- Skills
. Tools
. Work Ethic
Fulﬁllment

 

 

 

diversity.

empathy, efﬁcacy, celebration, cultural identity

\

 

J

 

Dance, music, art, drama, rigour, specialized
instructors, diversity in experiences,
modelling, mentoring, direct instruction,
perseverance, learners take on the role of
teaching, challenge, trial and error, role-
playing, critical thinking, expression, how to
create, professional, sophisticated skills at
observing and interpreting the world.

 

 

Important, exciting, engaging, inspiring,
multiple intelligence, teacher as
guide/mentor/coach/partner, personal

fulfillment, accomplishment, inspiring passion,

giving students a showcase, hard work, FUN
inclusive, meaningful, time to create, putting
ideas into action, modern expression.

 

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

2009 (DRAFT)

Model G:

Self-awareness Else Awareness

 

Fulfillment

Community Mastery

 

 

 

20 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Model H:

 

Process

 

 

 

Context

 

 

 

Perception/
Communication

 

 

ﬁg

Discovery and
Exploration
;—2

V
—\

Creative Exploration

;—J

 

V7
—\

Cross-curricular
Projects (themes;
team teaching)

 

 

 

;—J

 

V7

Problem Solving:
How can I create
this? What medium
can I use?

V
f——\

Ensemble and
Solo Work

;—2

 

V7

Basic Skill
Development in All
Strands
K—J

 

Variety of
Experiences (e.g.,
media, styles,
instruments)

 

 

g

 

Exposure to Real-
Iife Artists

 

Creative/Productive
Cultural/Historical
Critical/Responsive

 

 

r
Appreciation of All

Arts
g—)

V
(—

Multicultural
Component

g—J

 

V

Value of Arts
Education in a
Person’s Life

 

 

K—J

Trained teachers
Flexibility

More specialists

and identity
. No grading

. Implementation support
. Four strands could be core

curriculum

Hopes
Sample lesson plans with resources

Continuity through K—12
Encourage confidence, seIf-worth

Help with assessment strategies

Signiﬁcance of the

Arts in Shaping
Identity

 

V7

Communication

 

V

Measurable
Outcomes —
Research into New

Assessment
Strategies

 

      

 
 
  
  
 
 

 
   
   

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

21
2009 (DRAFT)

Model I:

 

 

 

   

  

Creative History

 

 

 

Expression

   
   

 

Communication

 

 

 

 

22 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Model J:

 

Specific Skills
Physical and Technical
Skills

Use of Technology
Variety of Media

 

 

 

  

Development
ofthe Whole
Child

Appreciation

 

 

 

Lifelong Learning
Beauty
Opportunity to Play
Exploration
Creativity

 

 

 

Teamwork
Collaboration
Community Connection
Community Leaders

 

 

 

 

 

o Authentic Assessment
0 Individualized Instruction

 

 

 

    
   
    

 

 

   

0 Critical Thinking
o Interconnections

between the Arts
and Other
Disciplines
Connectiveness
Multi-disciplines
Problem Solving
Critical Analysis of
Works of Art

 

 

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

23
2009 (DRAFT)

Model K:

 
 

Imagination

  
   
  
 

   
   
  
  

Discovery

0 Opportunity
0 Interpretation
0 Integration

0 Incorporation
0 Exploration

  
  
  
  
   
  

Creative Expression

. Meaning (purpose)

. Expression

. Performance and
display

. Whole child (M.|.)

. Appreciation

. Global citizenship

. Community

. Satisfaction and JOY!

. Connecting/belonging

   
   
  
   
 
      
   
  
 

Reflection

   
 

Process

0 Synthesize

0 Process, not product

0 Teamwork and
interaction

0 DO!

0 Risk taking and
challenge

0 Create

 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 

Communication

 
 

 

24 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Model L:

 

   
 
  
   
 
   

Connection of Art and Culture

0 Appreciation for the arts

0 Interpret with language to
critique images, movement and
sound

0 Identity — self—discovery and
social searching

0 Cultural values — learning and
respecting culture

0 Value the artistic work of others

 

 

 

   
  

    
 

Expression and Communication

0 Synthesize art from a variety of
sources/media

Community

0 Group cooperation
0 Group collaboration

0 Demonstrate — knowledge, skill,
ability, understanding
0 Express/communicate — feelings,

 
  

0 Independent ideas
0 Participation; being a leader
0 Working with others

 

thoughts, events, ideas
0 Modelling
0 Final product
0 Express individual opinions and
interpretations

 
  
 
  

 
 
  
  

 

 

Process and Problem Solving

0 Creativity
o Brainstorming
0 Thinking skills
0 Practice

0 Trial and error
0 Production
0 Imagination

 
     
   
   
     
   

 

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 25
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Model M:

Arts Education

 

 

 

Foundational
Skills

 

 

 

r—

Rigorous curriculum
—4

Understanding
technical processes

Practical skill
progression

(—
Develop and identify
talent

—\

Specific curriculum

\—
fé

Continuity between
grades

—\

Assessable outcomes
—4

Teach creative

 

 

Development
and Discovery
of Identity

 

 

No fear of failure
—4
Strong identity
—4
Confidence
\_J
Analytical skills
—4
'—

Risk taking

—4
,—

Active pa rticipation
\—
—‘

EXpression/Expressive
s—J
'—

C re ativity

—1

Developing a
well-rounded child

 

\—J

'—
Fun

 

 

 

—d

 

process
a \—/
r w r N
Competency in Lifelong participation
speciﬁc disciplines in the Arts

 

 

The Process
of Creative
Expression

 

 

 

Problem solving

Team building

Understanding of

personal creative
process

 

 

26

2009 (DRAFT)

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

Model N:

 
 

   
 

Not Optional

Essential

 

 

 

 
 

Rationale

 

 

 

 

 

Global Citizens

 

 

Supporters of the Arts/
Valuers

 

 

Foundation for Lifelong
Learning

 

 

Educational Value

 

 

Discriminating Consumers

 

 

Help Set Context in History

 

 

Expression of
Community/Connectedness

 

 

Problem Solve rs

 

 

Active Pa rticipantsf‘Do-ers"

Appreciation

 

 

Specialist Teachers

 

 

 

Designers

 

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

    
  

Crucial

Arts

  

  

27
2009 (DRAFT)

Model 0:

 

Arts Education
General Learning Outcomes

/\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Life Outcomes

. Play!

. Enjoyment of
school

. Joy

. Tactile learning

. Confidence

. The whole child

. Opportunity to
fail

. Push beyond
comfort zone for
growth

 

[Past and Present\

Cultural Context

. Cultural
awareness

. Cross—cultural
opportunities

. In, ofand about
arts

. “Core"—solid
foundation of
basic
skills/knowledge

. History/historical
appreciation of

 

 

the arts

Citizenship

  

. Lifelong learning

. Personal growth

. Experiencing

. Developing
tomorrow’s
citizens

. Inclusive
belonging

. Ultimate goal is
the impact on

quality of life

 
  
 
 
 
 
  

   

  

 

 

 

 

Arts Education
Speciﬁc Learning Outcomes

Creative
Expression

. Expressive
. Expression
. Self—expression

. Cultural
expression

. Creativity

. Originality

. The creative
process

 

 

 

 

l

 

 

Knowledge

. Research-based
resources

. “Whole brain" learning

. Qualiﬁed, consistently
trained instructors

. Assessment

. Integrity of program

 

 

Skills

. Educators with a
passion for the arts

. Different learning styles
(e.g., kinesthetic,
visual, aural)

. Levelled

. Continuity

 

 

 

Communication

. Communication of
thoughts and self
. Articulation

 

 

2009 (DRAFT)

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

 

Recommendations

Recommendation for Core Learnings

While group models and language varied among the focus groups, there were several key
concepts/themes that emerged. Most groups identiﬁed that the ultimate goal ofArts Education
was the fulfillment and nourishment of the whole child, resulting in fuh/joy.

The themes below represent the most commonly identified elements of an Arts Education

program and are recommended for consideration in the development of a K—l2 Arts Education

Curriculum Framework:

V Self—awareness — self-discovery, identity, conﬁdence, fulﬁllment, voice, reﬂection

V Connecting and Belonging — community, relationships, citizenship, play, fun

V Else Awareness — culture, global citizenship, context, multiple perspectives, history,
appreciation and valuing the arts, critical and responsive, arts consumers, artistic literacy,
reﬂection

V Creative Process — participation, collaboration, imagination, critical thinking, risk-taking,
problem solving, aesthetic education

V Creative Expression/Celebration — participation, communication and expression of
thoughts, feelings and ideas; integration into other subjects

V Skill Development — mastery, technical skills, language, rigour, thinking skills, job skills,
career planning.

Recommendation for Teacher Development and Certification

The consensus among the groups was that the ideal Arts Education teacher is someone who is
passionate, knowledgeable and skilled in the art form that he/she is teaching. It is recommended
that teacher education programs and professional development opportunities for Alberta
teachersfocus Ohﬁrst attracting and retaining passionate teachers of the arts, and then
supporting knowledge and skill development.

Recommendation for Curriculum Acquisition Feasibility

Alberta Education staff did not display curriculum models from other education systems outside
Alberta during the focus groups so as to engage the participants in an authentic curriculum
reView process. When groups were asked to identify the key components of an Arts Education
curriculum, many struggled with the language and structure necessary to communicate their
desires for a new program of studies. It may have been helpful to consider several curriculum
documents for the purpose of stimulating discussion, borrowing and recombining the best ideas.
Without prompting, several of the groups mentioned that future groups consider other curriculum
documents. Curriculum documents from Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Europe were mentioned
as models to consider.

 

K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report 29
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 2009 (DRAFT)

Recommendation for Middle Years — Complementary Programs
Collaboration

Recommendations for middle years opportunities were inconclusive. Some schools identified
positive experiences when students participated in ﬁne arts “exploratories” or “minis” instead of
full-year options. These short, exploratory courses (3 to 12 weeks in length) were designed to
expose students to brief experiences in all four of the arts (music, Visual arts, drama and dance)
in the first year or two of middle school. As students progressed to year two or three, they
selected courses they wanted to study further. Some participants reported that these exploratory
courses allowed students to find hidden talents or interests, and that they exposed students to all
the complementary courses that a school could offer.

Other participants were adamant that the arts do not lend themselves well to “dabbling”—that the
development of skill sets and appreciation in the arts takes time. Arts processes and production
require time for exploration of self, reﬂection, relationship building, collaboration, feedback and
adaptation to be fully lived and experienced. Many participants felt that merely sampling the arts
would reduce the experience to tokenism, and that the strength and truth of the arts experience
would be lost in such a model.

Initial reaction to middle years collaboration was inconclusive. Therefore, it is recommended
that a middle years Arts Education focus group consider the opportunities and challenges
involved in a middle years program model.

Recommendation for Next Steps

Initial consultations identified the need for further consultation with Francophone, French
Immersion, F irst Nations, Métis and Inuit stakeholders. These consultations are documented in
K—12 Arts Education Summary of Consultations with Francophone and French Immersion
Representatives and K—l2 Arts Education: First Nations, Metis and Inuit Focus Groups —
Themes and Findings in Arts Education.

Upon completion ofihitial consultations it is recommended thatAlberta Education convene a
working group to consider informatiOhﬁ'om a variety ofsources, including research and
promising practice, focus group results and other Arts Education curriculum models for the
purpose ofihformihg the development of a Draft K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Framework.

 

30 K—12 Arts Education Curriculum Consultation Report
2009 (DRAFT) ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada

